The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Sermon: Thou shalt not commit Adultery, by
Joseph Phillimore


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: A Sermon: Thou shalt not commit Adultery


Author: Joseph Phillimore



Release Date: April 26, 2020  [eBook #61940]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SERMON: THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT
ADULTERY***


Transcribed from an undated copy in Kensington and Chelsea local studies,
bound with pamphlets by Rev. Joseph Phillimore.  Many thanks to
Kensington and Chelsea local studies for making it available for
transcription.

                      [Picture: Public domain cover]





                                    A
                                 SERMON.


                               EXODUS, XX. 14.

                      _Thou shalt not commit Adultery_.

NOTHING is more serious than religion, and this Commandment, which God
himself hath taught us, nothing is less seriously considered; religion
teacheth us our duty to our Creator, our fellow creatures, and ourselves,
shewing us the way to escape future misery, and present trouble, and to
obtain everlasting happiness.  In the present æra, the crime of adultery
seems much to prevail, to the great dishonour of what I have just
mentioned; let me implore the attention of this congregation to enquire
into the causes of it, pointing out the fatal and dreadful consequences
attendant on this course of living, and if haply, we can find them,
eradicate the same, as an evil apparently spreading in the world, it
becometh the professors of christianity to condemn and discourage it, as
well as the preacher of the Gospel to intimidate his hearers, in order to
suppress the progress of it in future, as a crime that must undermine all
the social virtues the heart possesses, and all the real enjoyment and
hope of happiness, here and hereafter.  My first endeavour is to find out
the origin or cause of this most melancholy evil, to prevent its present
as well as future extent, and save the souls of many who are at a very
critical time just entering into life, big with the prospect of enjoying
every comfort, innocency and pureness of heart can receive, till art and
delusive sin make their various attacks; for if we enter into life void
of sin, void of hypocrisy, and of a deceitful heart, with minds desirous
of being informed with every requisite perfection that adorns and
animates the human race, to perform virtuous and laudable actions, it is
to be acquired at a time when we are supposed to have arrived at mature
age, and reason directs us, and are judged proper and fit to be
accountable only to our conscience for the loss of our souls, and not
owing to ignorance and inattention to those instructive commandments, we
ought to have had engraved and written in our hearts the ten
Commandments, as the guide of our youth, and the great comfort of old
age; the world in general wants a thorough reformation, and all ranks and
degrees of people whatever, and whensoever any societies private or
public meet or assemble, and encourage or countenance such neglect of
duty, and the breaking of any one single commandment of our blessed
Saviour’s as trifling or of immaterial consequence, they ought to be
informed of the great danger they stand in here in this life of trial and
approbation, and of the little hopes of futurity, for scripture assures
us God can as soon destroy whole nations and cities, as he has done, for
continuing in wicked and abandoned courses, as he can take away the life
of a single individual, therefore let the world be warned of and desist
from its error, as it will encrease in the displeasure of the Almighty,
and let not this cause be advanced, that any one commits it through
inattention, or having had examples which apparently are not immediately
corrected by the hands of providence, yet God knoweth the very secrets of
all our hearts.  The next reason to be advanced for the origin, or cause,
I am afraid on examination more like to be, than the preceding one,
therefore weigh them both deeply in your minds, all ye that this day hear
my text and discourse, and which ever you think most likely to prevail
forsake it—This then, I am fearfully, wonderfully and sorely afraid is
the source, the disturbed and impure spring from whence the mind is
tainted while young, and very susceptible of receiving the first
impressions whether good or bad, is idolized, neglected, or flattered,
and for want of examination either, from an affectionate father,
guardian, or conductor, whether she improved as she grows mature, in
virtue, steadiness, discretion, and understanding the commandments of our
blessed Redeemer, the full meaning, the full intent and design of them,
as our fond father wished, and hoped every one would in whatsoever sphere
of life, either male or female, moved in, that they were to be the great
foundation from whence every comfort present and future should flow, and
bring salvation at the last great day of universal judgment to our
immortal souls: but many have been taught them insignificantly, and at a
time long ere they come into the world have forgot the great use of them,
thinking they were to be learnt while very young, and of no consequence
to be attended to hereafter, and that other ornaments and qualification
were far more requisite, and more desirable, all qualifications and
improvements are highly laudable in any one to obtain: but yet may you
all remember the commandments of your God are the sole protectors of
innocency, religion and virtue, and when all others fade they will
remain, and plead for the broken and contrite heart at the throne of
grace, for Satan misses no opportunity of pursuing the ignorant and
neglected, and is continually on the watch seeking whom he may devour
like a ramping and roaring lion greedy of his prey, laying his snares,
and while young the heart is soon tempted and led astray, and instantly
as the incautious and giddy enter into the large and spacious world
surrounded with gaiety and pleasure, they fall a sacrifice to infamy and
disgrace which let succeeding years let ever so quick, ever so many, can
never entirely wipe away or extinguish.  If there are any among you
chosen as examples of virtue, be religious and let not this be laid
against you, who ought to have been examplary in every thing that is
praiseworthy behaved quite contrary to morality and decency.  Think on
the fond parent who watches the infant, with every tender thought, with
every affectionate look, folds him in his arms, with transports of the
greatest love and joy, reflecting within himself can I but support my
child, with industry will I labour night and day, till it is able to
secure comfort to itself, I am determined it shall not want food for its
maintenance, or raiment for its body to protect it from the inclemency of
severe and nipping winter, and every improvement for its mind that is to
be acquired; all these advantages for a beloved child will I eagerly seek
after, even suffer adversity rather than it should be neglected, and a
denial of many wonted comforts, for I shall be rewarded by it hereafter
when it arrives at years of discretion, and judgment: but, alas after all
these warm, these most pleasing feelings; the time comes for these
virtues and all this affection, and accomplishments to shine forth, and
to be returned to the aged parent declining with years and almost bending
to the brink of the grave, to bid a long farewell to the world, and
receive the last comforts of worn out and decrepid old age, this darling
object in which all his delight and happiness for many past years had
been placed and vainly thought to be innocent, is led forth, accused, and
condemned by the great council of the nation of the most horrid crime of
adultery; oh, miserable state, lost innocence and fallen virtue truly
lamentable, never to be restored or recovered.

Having given you two reasons from whence this unhappy sin arises.  I
shall proceed to inform mankind why God instituted marriage, and prove it
the most solemn engagement on this side of the grave concluding with some
useful reflections on my text.  Providence’s delight, pleasure, and
satisfaction, is, was, and ever will be to consult and provide every
comfort for man void of sin, during his short and uncertain passage on
earth, knowing very well when he created him, he could not live alone,
and it was highly necessary the human race should be spread into
different parts of the earth and of God’s large and spacious dominions in
order that the whole earth might be inhabited and that a knowledge of a
future state should be delivered down to posterity, that religion should
flourish; that God should be worshipped in spirit and in truth, that man
should have a due sense of his nature, how wonderful he was in all his
works, that he made the heavens, and the earth, and the stars; and the
sun to rule by day, and the moon by night, that learning should flourish,
that an eager desire of improvement in every art and science should enter
into the mind of man according to the abilities nature had endowed him
with; some men should turn their thoughts to lofty and sublime
contemplations, others to the various sorts of husbandry and agriculture,
and that the earth should be tilled and at a proper season, man for his
earnest endeavours of industry and integrity should be paid for his
trouble, and expence in his respective employment, whether high or low;
for God loveth the good in every situation: that he should look round
about him and be thoroughly satisfied with these blessings, but all these
things could not be accomplished and brought to perfection without man
was to have a mate and partner in life; accordingly, that nothing should
be deficient or wanting for man’s real happiness, God, instituted this
holy and solemn ceremony that by living together in pureness and love the
world should be peopled, this was the only means Providence in his great
wisdom and mercy to a fallen generation condescended to prevent sin and
secure to himself a peculiar people free from corruption and
disobedience, shewing at the same time how manifestly, and how greatly he
wished the salvation of his beloved children he ordained this
commandment, thou shalt not commit adultery, for as Isaac and Rebecca
lived together soberly and quietly and as Sarah obeyed Abraham in calling
him Lord, so ought all ye as long as ye live together, in sickness and in
health, in adversity as well as prosperity, till death either the one or
the other takes away.  Yet this sacred, this wonderful affection and love
of our great and fond father, creator and redeemer is like the rest of
his most valuable precepts and institutions in these our sinful days very
frequently broken, therefore be cautious all ye who are about to
approach, the sacred altar of God and come not irreverently, I mean
either male or female disinterested in your choice having made it either
for lucre or splendor, but pay due attention to what you then hear and
are about to perform, a ceremony, which must give God the greatest
pleasure if you adhere to your commandments and as you call upon God to
witness the truth of your intention, you ought previously to have
revolved serious thoughts in your minds in order not to be negligent or
inattentive to what you then hear and ought to understand, never
intending to fulfil your promise faithfully, you act the most wicked and
unfeeling of all human actions, for whoever breaks this commandment is
sure to bring unhappiness and misery on one side, and most likely
destruction and a broken heart on the other; adultery induceth sinful man
to do what is wrong to his fellow creature, but God is not thus to be
dealt with, and without allowing a single moment’s thought or reflection,
on future punishment, for wicked deeds; by this crime his own feelings
must plunge him into trouble and unhappiness in the day time, and in the
calm and serene hour of sleep and refreshment awaken him with the guilt
of a wicked conscience, having disunited by subtility and hypocrisy, the
hearts of those who had been once endeared to each other and knitted
together in the bonds of friendship and in the tenderest and dearest ties
of affection and love.  Present time and youth may make sinners
inattentive to such wickedness, but depend upon it, the serious departing
hour and a death bed repentance will renew all these sad and melancholy
actions to our view, when the broken heart is overwhelmed with grief, and
the tongue too feeble to pray to its God.

We read in Scripture of one of the best of men having been guilty of this
crime, but God suffered him not to go unpunished, for king David very
much displeased the Lord for the treatment of Uriah the Hittite for the
sake of Bathsheba, and besides the crime of adultery he was hypocritical
and perfidious and ungrateful, and for this very purpose it is mentioned
so very strong in holy writ, to prevent in future, the very best of men
in every other respect from committing this crime.  David became penitent
and sorrowful, for having displeased the Lord, for as his crime was of
the highest nature, it called aloud for his severe vengeance, and he
punished him in the most feeling manner, for the little child which he
had born unto him in which his soul delighted, the Lord struck with
sickness and it died: this is scripture evidence of temporal punishment,
but what makes this crime the greater, it is generally attended with
hypocrisy, for the very person that performs it pretends to be the most
sincere friend, to him, in whose heart he pierces the most sharp pointed
dart, and secretly bereaves him of that peace of mind the world can never
restore, and that confidence the greatest of all happiness, which he
vainly thought no time or circumstances could ever remove; remember this,
O ye dealers in iniquity, it was not an open enemy that had done me this
dishonor, but it was even thou my companion, mine own familiar friend.
Men are exhorted in scripture to love their wives, as Christ loved the
church, and gave himself for her, and to forsake father and mother, and
cleave to their wives; as for the female part of the creation, let them
remember, a virtuous woman is a crown of glory to her husband, but she
that maketh him ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.  Be wise now
therefore, O ye sons and daughters of Abraham and attend to the proverbs
of Solomon, the Lord giveth wisdom and discretion unto thee, to preserve
thee, from the ways of the evil man, whose ways are darkness and sorrow,
and from the strange woman, which flattereth with her words, and
forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God;
whose house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead, none that
go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the path of life.
Marriage is reduced by our Saviour to its original institution, as it was
in the beginning, before the passions of men had broken through the
rules, which right reason prescribed, and by polygamy had brought poverty
and discord into houses, and many troubles and wickedness into the world,
to which had been added another evil, that of frequent divorces.  The
Gospel requires of all those who enter into this holy state, that they
pass their days together in sacred love, fidelity, and friendship, and in
a joint care of their families.

Before I conclude, there is one rank of people, I most feelingly address
myself unto, in order to prevent adultery, and that is, parents of every
condition, being as such myself, most affectionately interested for the
future race avoiding disgrace, and ignominy, as well as the present.  My
advice and recommendation to one and all, is to consider the weighty and
important characters they support, and maintain it in dignity and being
patterns of virtue themselves, and governing their children by good
examples, rather than threatenings or punishment, for the truly
affectionate and virtuous parents, God in his great mercy in all
probability will grant obedient and affectionate children, as a
recompence, that will honour them while on earth and reverence their name
after their departure, remembering there is no advantage to speak evil of
the dead especially he who hath walked uprightly, walketh surely, but he
that perverteth the ways of the good shall be known.  Two qualifications
for the mind are incumbent on all parents, who are capable, which few are
not, in these our enlightened and improved days, to learn their children,
at least if not to learn them, to examine them frequently, and hear them
when instructed, and particularly on the sabbath day, that is their
prayers and the church catechism, which may appear to the giddy and
inconsiderate an arduous and irksome task, yet to the truly pious and
religious, must be laudable, and meet with approbation: this will be
building their posterity on a rock which will not easily be moved, and
when the vices of the age which have ruined, and I am afraid will
continue to shorten the lives of many of their cotemporaries, they will
stand fast, having prayed to God night and morning for his peculiar care
and protection, wherefore Providence having carried them through the many
casualties of infancy, and safely guided them against, and turned them
aside from the perpetual dream and pressing torrent of unruly and raging
passions swollen with intemperance and excess, at a maturer age he will
crown them with virtue at the end.  Children are not looked upon by many
parents as the greatest of all blessings, and as a gift and heritage that
cometh of the Lord, many treat them not as the first and principal object
of man’s heart, remembering what our blessed Saviour saith, suffer the
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven, but train up a child in the way he shall go, and when
he is old, he will not depart from it; this is of the highest moment to
all parents, and let them remember, not to deserve the rebuke and
chastisement of that all merciful and most affectionate father of the
universe, who wishes not that the least of all these his little children
should perish, but live, be happy, and be immortal.

I will now point out a method, which I hope will prevent this crime, as
for man, let him marry a woman purely for her virtue, and the woman the
hidden man of the heart, preferring one another, concealing nothing from
each other which concerns mutual affection, remembering, we are all
imperfect beings, yet we are the noblest objects of God’s thoughts, and
each sex as valuable in its respective situation, in the sight of God,
the one as the other, therefore as God was without spot and blemish, let
us imitate him and become as pure as our frail nature will admit of, let
us obey the text, and turn not from the path of righteousness.  We should
do all that is in our power for the mutual advantages of one another, and
if either is guilty of any trifling fault, look upon it as accidental,
and not a designed intention of disobliging, by which means we shall
never have cause to dispute one with another, for frequently from very
trifling circumstances, inattention first begins, succeeded with dislike,
and then successive faults on both sides, the one grows careless and
inattentive to the other, till at last a thorough dislike arises on each
side, and for revenge, this unhappy sin takes its origin, attended on one
part with all the disgrace and dishonour the female has to boast of, and
on the other, dissatisfaction and inquietude at home, from whence, man
becomes restless, and uneasy in his mind, for as soon as he is deprived
of comfort in his own dwelling, in vain will he hunt for peace in the
whole world besides.—Therefore in order to preserve virtue and chastity,
let all make trial at a proper season of life of this divine blessing,
instituted and ordained by Providence, and those that are joined together
in God’s presence, by obedience in their situation, let not man have it
in his power to put asunder, but by living together in harmony,
faithfulness and constancy, in adversity as well as prosperity, for the
school of adversity which we all wish to escape, is the great trial of
our faith and obedience, and in vain let the sycophant boast at that
period, the unhappiness, woe, and misery he hath caused the innocent to
experience and frustrate all the mischievous and insinuating attempts of
artful and deceitful men, which, let them be ever so long secreted from
man during his passage here, at the last great day, God will disclose
them, and the secrets of the libertine and adulterer brought forth to
condemn him.

Thus have I endeavoured to prove how highly culpable, every person is and
how daring to presume to break through: a commandment descended from so
great an author; the disadvantages accompanying this disobedience I have
already fully described, and am persuaded, must be unhappiness
continually while we are here, for reason before mentioned and observed,
but still there is worse punishment and inconveniencies to fear, and
greater sufferings to undergo, and that is not man’s displeasure only,
but Almighty God’s just and severe correction, remembering he will grant
his most gracious pardon to all those who ignorantly do wrong and by that
means fall into error, but this is one of his most express commandments,
and he adds, happy are ye when ye know them, if ye do them, but if ye
continue to break them, your future salvation, will be insecure when you
quit this scene of life, resting assured there is not a greater crime to
be committed by man than this, therefore write it in your hearts, that
perfect obedience to the divine will of our father which is in heaven, is
the only spring, the only fountain from whence peace in this present
world can be obtained, and the only method of receiving pardon and
forgiveness in the world to come, in those blessed mansions where the
pure alone will see God.

Remember this, O ye wives, as St. Paul saith to the Ephesians, submit
yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord, and let every man in
particular, says the same apostle, so love his wife as himself, and the
wife that she reverence her husband.

Be ye followers of God as dear children, and walk in love, as Christ also
hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and sacrifice
for a sweet smelling favour.

                                * * * * *

                                  FINIS.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SERMON: THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT
ADULTERY***


******* This file should be named 61940-0.txt or 61940-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/1/9/4/61940


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

